Add script recommendations (#2888)
nf-core/website: sites/docs/src/content/docs/guidelines/components/modules.md

Alternate suggestions include using `grep -c` to search for a valid string match, or other tool which will appropriately error when the expected output is not successfully created.

### Script inclusion

> Where the content of the `script:` block is not a simple call to a command, but rather a script (e.g. in R, Python), you have a set of options available to you:
> 
> - Inline process code: code can still be included in the script block using a shebang like `#!/usr/bin/env python`, and code used inline as with regular shell content. This can, however, be obstructive to understanding of module code when content gets extensive.
> - [Module templates](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-templates): templates work exactly the same as inline code (so beware of the need to escape dollar signs etc), however can be stored external to the process definition in the module, in a `templates` subfolder. This is done for the [DESeq2 module](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/tree/master/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential), for example.
> - Externalise the scripts entirely, and access them via a Conda definition. This is probably the cleanest solution, but requires a little more effort and management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Script template location and structure

A raw script code based module (i.e., not a command-line tool execution but raw R or python etc. code) MUST go in a [Nextflow module template](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-templates) script file. You SHOULD NOT use [Nextflow binaries](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-binaries) where possible, as these are not fully portable across all execution contexts.

The script file MUST go in a directory called `templates/` that sits alongside the `main.nf` of the module. 

The script file MUST be named after module itself with a language appropriate file suffix. e.g. the `deseq2/differential` nf-core module will use the `deseq2_differential.R`

The script file can be referred to within the module itself using the following notation:

    ```nextflow
    script:
    template 'deseq2_differential/R'
    ```

An example can be seen with `deseq2/differential` [here](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/master/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/main.nf#L47).

The resulting structure would look like this.

    ```tree
    deseq2
    └── differential
        ├── environment.yml
        ├── main.nf
        ├── meta.yml
        ├── templates
        │   └── deqseq2_differential.R
        └── tests
            ├── main.nf.test
            ├── main.nf.test.snap
            └── tags.yml
    ```

#### Script template contents

:::warning
Be aware that in any script template that Nextflow needs to be escaped in the same way you would in a standard bash `script:` block!
:::

The script template file MUST generate a `versions.yml` file in the language-appropriate way that contains versions of the base language and all relevant libraries and packages. 

The generated `versions.yml` MUST have the same structure as a  standard nf-core module `versions.yml`.

For example, for R you can refer to the `deseq2/differential` module [here](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/templates/deseq_de.R#L509-L534).

#### Script template stub

A script template module MUST also include a stub block following a standard nf-core module structure (i.e., using e.g. `touch` to generate empty files, and versions. You can see  the `deseq2/differential` module example [here](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/main.nf#L34-L49).

An inline command to call the version for libraries for the `versions.yml` MAY be used in this case. For an R example see [deseq2/differential](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/main.nf#L47).

```

Alternate suggestions include using `grep -c` to search for a valid string match, or other tool which will appropriately error when the expected output is not successfully created.

### Script inclusion

:::note

> You SHOULD NOT use [Nextflow module binaries](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-binaries) where possible, as these are not fully portable across all execution contexts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You SHOULD NOT use [Nextflow module binaries](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-binaries), as these are not fully portable across all execution contexts.
```

Reviewer: As it negates the RFC on second thoughts

:::

> If a module's `script:` block contains not command invocations, but script content, whatever the language (e.g. Bash, R, Python), and if that content is non-trivial in length (>> 10 lines), that MUST be supplied via a [Nextflow module template](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-templates). This makes it clearer when changes have been made to the scientific logic in the script, or to the workflow-relevant logic in the module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a module's `script:` block contains not command invocations, but script content, whatever the language (e.g. Bash, R, Python), and if that content is non-trivial in length (> 10 lines), that MUST be supplied via a [Nextflow module template](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-templates).
This makes it clearer when changes have been made to the scientific logic in the script, or to the workflow-relevant logic in the module.

#### Inline script code

If the script content is less than 10 lines, the code MAY be embedded directly in the module without a dedicated template file, however should still follow the guidance content as with a template.

The first line of an inline script code block MUST contain an appropriate language shebang.
For example:

```
script:
"""
#! /usr/bin/env R
```

```

> #### Template location

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Template module location
```

>  The template MUST go in a directory called `templates/` that sits alongside the `main.nf` of the module. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The template MUST go in a directory called `templates/` that sits alongside the `main.nf` of the module. 
```

The template file MUST be named after module itself with a language appropriate file suffix. e.g. the `deseq2/differential` nf-core module will use the `deseq2_differential.R`

The template file can be referred to within the module itself using the following notation:

    ```nextflow
    script:
    template 'deseq2_differential/R'
    ```

An example can be seen with `deseq2/differential` [here](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/master/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/main.nf#L47).

The resulting structure would look like this.

    ```tree
    deseq2
    └── differential
        ├── environment.yml
        ├── main.nf
        ├── meta.yml
        ├── templates
        │   └── deqseq2_differential.R
        └── tests
            ├── main.nf.test
            ├── main.nf.test.snap
            └── tags.yml
    ```

> #### Template contents

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Template or inline script-code contents
```

:::warning
Be aware that in any script template that Nextflow needs to be escaped in the same way you would in a standard bash `script:` block!
:::

> The script template file MUST generate a `versions.yml` file in the language-appropriate way that contains versions of the base language and all relevant libraries and packages. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The script template file or inline script code (<10 lines) MUST generate a `versions.yml` file in the language-appropriate way that contains versions of the base language and all relevant libraries and packages. 
```

The generated `versions.yml` MUST have the same structure as a  standard nf-core module `versions.yml`.

For example, for R you can refer to the `deseq2/differential` module [here](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/templates/deseq_de.R#L509-L534).

> #### Script template stub

Author: ```suggestion
#### Stubs in templated modules
```

> #### Script template stub

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Template module stub
```

> A script template module MUST also include a stub block following a standard nf-core module structure (i.e., using e.g. `touch` to generate empty files, and versions. You can see  the `deseq2/differential` module example [here](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/main.nf#L34-L49).

Author: ```suggestion
A templated module MUST have a stub block in the same way as any other module (i.e., using e.g. `touch` to generate empty files, and versions). You can see  the `deseq2/differential` module example [here](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/main.nf#L34-L49).
```

Alternate suggestions include using `grep -c` to search for a valid string match, or other tool which will appropriately error when the expected output is not successfully created.

### Script inclusion

> :::note
> You SHOULD NOT use [Nextflow module binaries](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-binaries), as these are not fully portable across all execution contexts.
> :::

Author: ```suggestion
:::note
You SHOULD NOT use [Nextflow module binaries](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-binaries), as these are not fully portable across all execution contexts.
:::

:::note
Where script content in a module becomes particularly extensive, you should consider hosting the code externally and provisioning via Conda/ Docker.
:::
```

Alternate suggestions include using `grep -c` to search for a valid string match, or other tool which will appropriately error when the expected output is not successfully created.

### Script inclusion

> :::note

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::warning
```

You SHOULD NOT use [Nextflow module binaries](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-binaries), as these are not fully portable across all execution contexts.

> :::

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if this is the right place to have this warning. IMO - this is documentation of the nf-core way of doing things, and it's not necessary to say we don't use binaries because for whatever reason. It could be rephrased as a positive statement about templates being portable rather than being negative about module binaries.

Reviewer: Fair point, will propose a new one,

:::note

> Where script content in a module becomes particularly extensive, you should consider hosting the code externally and provisioning via Conda/ Docker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where script content in a module becomes particularly extensive, we strongly encourage packaging and hosting the code externally and provisioning via Conda/ Docker as a standalone tool(kit).
```

> Where script content in a module becomes particularly extensive, we strongly encourage packaging and hosting the code externally and provisioning via Conda/ Docker as a standalone tool(kit).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Where script content in a module becomes particularly extensive, we strongly encourage packaging and hosting the code externally and provisioning via Conda/Docker as a standalone tool(kit).
```

> If a module's `script:` block contains a script rather than command invocations, regardless of the language (e.g., Bash, R, Python), and the content is more than approximately 20 lines, it MUST be provided through a [Nextflow module template](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-templates).
> Using module templates helps distinguish between changes made to the scientific logic within the script and those affecting the workflow-specific logic in the module. This separation improves the code's clarity and maintainability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using module templates helps distinguish between changes made to the scientific logic within the script and those affecting the workflow-specific logic in the module. This separation improves the code's clarity and maintainability.
If a module's `script:` block contains a script rather than command invocations, regardless of the language (e.g., Bash, R, Python), and the content is more than approximately 20 lines, it MUST be provided through a [Nextflow module template](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-templates).
```

Reviewer 2: I flipped these around so the first sentence is more "introduction"

> If a module's `script:` block contains a script rather than command invocations, regardless of the language (e.g., Bash, R, Python), and the content is more than a readable length (as a rule of thumb, approximately 20 lines), it MUST be provided through a [Nextflow module template](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-templates).

Reviewer 3: The Nextflow docs discourages the use of templates for non-bash scripts: https://nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#template

> Template scripts are recommended only for Bash scripts. Languages that do not prefix variables with $ (e.g. Python and R) can’t be executed directly as a template script.

> The best practice for using a custom script is to embed it in the process definition at first and move it to a separate file with its own command line interface once the code matures.

Reviewer 3: But I guess the [module binaries](https://nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-binaries) feature requires Wave when the work directory is in object storage

Reviewer: Yes, the requirement of wave is why we opted not to do so as then it's not portable :/ (and use the examples from Jon)

Author: @bentsherman any chance of module binaries becoming a universal solution in future, like workflow bin? My last discussion with our lord and master suggested not, but this is is the unavoidable consequence (as far as I can tell).

:::

> If a module's `script:` block contains not command invocations, but script content, whatever the language (e.g. Bash, R, Python), and if that content is non-trivial in length (> 20 lines), that MUST be supplied via a [Nextflow module template](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-templates).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a module's `script:` block contains a script rather than command invocations, regardless of the language (e.g., Bash, R, Python), and the content is non-trivial in length (e.g., > 20 lines), it MUST be provided through a [Nextflow module template](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-templates).
```

Reviewer 2: Please check for meaning.

> This makes it clearer when changes have been made to the scientific logic in the script, or to the workflow-relevant logic in the module.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using module templates helps distinguish between changes made to the scientific logic within the script and those affecting the workflow-specific logic in the module. This separation improves the code's clarity and maintainability.
```

> 
> :::warning
> You SHOULD NOT use [Nextflow module binaries](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-binaries), as these are not fully portable across all execution contexts.
> :::
> 
> :::note
> Where script content in a module becomes particularly extensive, we strongly encourage packaging and hosting the code externally and provisioning via Conda/Docker as a standalone tool(kit).
> :::
> 
> If a module's `script:` block contains a script rather than command invocations, regardless of the language (e.g., Bash, R, Python), and the content is more than 20 lines, it MUST be provided through a [Nextflow module template](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-templates).
> Using module templates helps distinguish between changes made to the scientific logic within the script and those affecting the workflow-specific logic in the module. This separation improves the code's clarity and maintainability.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

If a module's `script:` block contains a script rather than command invocations, regardless of the language (e.g., Bash, R, Python), and the content is more than 20 lines, it MUST be provided through a [Nextflow module template](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/module.html#module-templates).
Using module templates helps distinguish between changes made to the scientific logic within the script and those affecting the workflow-specific logic in the module. This separation improves the code's clarity and maintainability.

:::note
We recommend use of Nextflow templates as they are the most portable method of the separate custom script execution across all execution contexts
:::

:::note
Where script content in a module becomes particularly extensive, we strongly encourage packaging and hosting the code externally and provisioning via Conda/Docker as a standalone tool(kit).
:::

```

How about this @christopher-hakkaart ?

#### Inline script code

> If the script content is less than 20 lines, the code MAY be embedded directly in the module without a dedicated template file, however should still follow the guidance content as with a template.

Reviewer 2: It's strange that there is a hard limit of 20 lines here but a softer definition above.

Reviewer: Added 'approximately' to all places, although they were all about the same level of strcitness IMO

> If the script content is less than 20 lines, the code MAY be embedded directly in the module without a dedicated template file, however should still follow the guidance content as with a template.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the script content is less than 20 lines, the code MAY be embedded directly in the module without a dedicated template file. However, they should still follow the guidance content as with a template.
```

> If the script content is less than 20 lines, the code MAY be embedded directly in the module without a dedicated template file. However, they should still follow the guidance content as with a template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the script content is less than approximately 20 lines, the code MAY be embedded directly in the module without a dedicated template file. However, they should still follow the guidance content as with a template.
```

#### Module template location

> The template MUST go in a directory called `templates/` that sits alongside the `main.nf` of the module.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The template MUST go into a directory called `templates/` in the same directory as the module `main.nf`.
```

> The template file MUST be named after module itself with a language appropriate file suffix. e.g. the `deseq2/differential` nf-core module will use the `deseq2_differential.R`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The template file MUST be named after the module itself with a language-appropriate file suffix. For example, the `deseq2/differential` nf-core module will use the `deseq2_differential.R`
```

> The template file can be referred to within the module itself using the following notation:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The template file can then be referred to within the module using the template function:
```

    ```nextflow
    script:

>     template 'deseq2_differential/R'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    template 'deseq2_differential.R'
```

Reviewer: lol woops

    ```

> An example can be seen with `deseq2/differential` [here](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/master/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/main.nf#L47).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See [`deseq2/differential`](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/master/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/main.nf#L47) for an example of a template in an nf-core pipeline.
```

The resulting structure would look like this.

    ```tree
    deseq2
    └── differential
        ├── environment.yml
        ├── main.nf
        ├── meta.yml
        ├── templates
        │   └── deqseq2_differential.R
        └── tests
            ├── main.nf.test
            ├── main.nf.test.snap
            └── tags.yml
    ```

#### Template or inline script-code contents

:::warning
Be aware that in any script template that Nextflow needs to be escaped in the same way you would in a standard bash `script:` block!
:::

> The script template file or inline script code (<20 lines) MUST generate a `versions.yml` file in the language-appropriate way that contains versions of the base language and all relevant libraries and packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The script template file or inline script code (less than approximately 20 lines) MUST generate a `versions.yml` file in the language-appropriate way that contains versions of the base language and all relevant libraries and packages.
```

> The script template file or inline script code (less than approximately 20 lines) MUST generate a `versions.yml` file in the language-appropriate way that contains versions of the base language and all relevant libraries and packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The script template file or inline script code (used when at a readable length) MUST generate a `versions.yml` file in the language-appropriate way that contains versions of the base language and all relevant libraries and packages.
```

The generated `versions.yml` MUST have the same structure as a standard nf-core module `versions.yml`.

> For example, for R you can refer to the `deseq2/differential` module [here](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/templates/deseq_de.R#L509-L534).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See the [`deseq2/differential` module](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/templates/deseq_de.R#L509-L534) for an example using R.
```

> See the [`deseq2/differential` module](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/templates/deseq_de.R#L509-L534) for an example using R.

Reviewer: For the second comment @Joon-Klaps please feel free to update the moduel/example :)

> See the [`deseq2/differential` module](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/templates/deseq_de.R#L509-L534) for an example using R.

Reviewer 4: In the mentioned example lines of code there is a small section dedicated into exporting the `R.sessionInfo()`. 
```
sink(paste(opt\$output_prefix, "R_sessionInfo.log", sep = '.'))
print(sessionInfo())
sink()
``` 
However, nothing is mentioned of this in these guidelines. So is it necessary or not? I'm guessing so given it was included in the referenced lines but would also explicitly mention it then in the guidelines. Although not certain about the added value of the `R.session()` info.

> See the [`deseq2/differential` module](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/templates/deseq_de.R#L509-L534) for an example using R.

Reviewer 4: https://github.com/nf-core/modules/pull/7243

> See the [`deseq2/differential` module](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/templates/deseq_de.R#L509-L534) for an example using R.

Reviewer: Ah got you. I don't think that makes sense putting 'how' to generate the yaml file in the guideline per se - we only care that it exists.

We can point to other examples though if it helps (feel free to make an additional PR). Maybe a dedicated tutorial page how to write such a template module would make sense due to the intricacies of the variable escaping? What do you think @pinin4fjords ?

#### Stubs in templated modules

> A templated module MUST have a stub block in the same way as any other module (i.e., using e.g. `touch` to generate empty files, and versions). You can see  the `deseq2/differential` module example [here](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/main.nf#L34-L49).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A templated module MUST have a stub block in the same way as any other module (i.e., using e.g. `touch` to generate empty files, and versions).
You can see  the `deseq2/differential` module example [here](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/main.nf#L34-L49).
```

> A templated module MUST have a stub block in the same way as any other module (i.e., using e.g. `touch` to generate empty files, and versions). You can see the `deseq2/differential` module example [here](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/main.nf#L34-L49).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A templated module MUST have a stub block in the same way as any other module. For example, using `touch` to generate empty files and versions. See [`deseq2/differential` module](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/main.nf#L34-L49) for an example in an nf-core module.
```

> An inline command to call the version for libraries for the `versions.yml` MAY be used in this case. For an R example see [deseq2/differential](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/main.nf#L47).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An inline command to call the version for libraries for the `versions.yml` MAY be used in this case.
For an R example see [deseq2/differential](https://github.com/nf-core/modules/blob/4c2d06a5e79abf08ba7f04c58e39c7dad75f094d/modules/nf-core/deseq2/differential/main.nf#L47).
```
